---
title: "Why Linux?"
date: 2021-07-06
categories:
- linux
tags:
- thoughts
summary: "Linux, or GNU/Linux, is an operating system made possible by the linux
kernel and the GNU toolchain."
draft: false

---


## What is Linux? 

Linux, or GNU/Linux, is an operating system made possible by the linux kernel
and the GNU toolchain. It is a unix-like operating system used by tinkerers and
hobbyists. Though some would prefer the term GNU/Linux, I think Linux would
suffice for this post. 

## Why Linux? 

Due to the free (as in freedom) nature of Linux-based operating systems, it is
possible to configure the system to be exactly what you want. Do you want it to
look like windows? Do you want it to look like a Mac? Or has it ever occured to
you that people could interact with computers beyond the UX of the 2
aforementioned operating systems? I would like to invite you to take a look
[here](https://www.reddit.com/r/unixart/). Here you can find the creativity of
the Linux community in full display. Linux can look like whatever you want it to
be.

But beauty is more than skin deep. How the system is arranged in Linux is built
on the well-established and well-thought foundations of the Unix Operating
System. Though components of Linux have changed over time, it is mostly for the
better (some might argue that Pulseaudio, Systemd and even Wayland is turning
Linux into the devil himself), and this is possible because most of the Linux
tools and programs do one thing, and do it well (this is called the Unix
philosophy). The aforementioned components that were/are controversial are
controversial because they add complexity and counters the Unix philosophy.
Though this seems disastrous, these tools have been widely adopted because the
circumstances that necessitated their creation have forced us to adopt newer
principles that are more forward thinking and in the long run, might be able to
keep things simpler. This is the KISS (keep it simple, stupid) philosophy at
play, and it might seem strange that sometimes to really stick to KISS, we must
accept a degree of complexity. But I am going off-tangent. Linux is a KISS
operating system, and that allows many well-written software to play nice with
each other. Systems with stable versions of Linux distributions (we call the
different variations of Linux "distributions") are able to run with years of
uptime without needing to restart and this is a testament of how robust the
system is. This is why most servers and supercomputers use Linux. You can trust
the system to get your job done.

Because of its design, it promotes a habit of exploring and tinkering. Don't you
want to know how your machine ticks? Though Linux looks difficult and niche, it
is the easiest operating system to tinker and yet still have a somewhat-stable
machine to still daily drive. This is possible because the inner workings follow
the KISS philosophy and can be understood by normal human beings if people just
put a little time into reading the documentation. Speaking of documentation,
there is a wealth of documentation by just Googling the right terms. But we
don't even need Google, because "--help" arguments and man (short for manual)
pages are available with every program. 

With enough tinkering, you will eventually tweak the system to be exactly what
you need it to be. All the excess cruft and bloat can be shaven away, not that
computers nowadays needs to be optimized to the megabyte, but your computer
should reflect the state of your mind: having only what you need and not having
baggage that distracts you from life. When you log into your Linux machine, you
automatically feel more productive, because it has been optimized to the point
that you can't help but do some work on it. It invites you to use it to better
yourself. Your computer shouldn't own you. You shouldn't adapt to questionable
design choices that big corporations try to force down your throat. You deserve
better. You deserve your own operating system, and with a little work, Linux can
be that operating
system. 
